Lev Weidman has asked us this question
why is the many worlds interpretation
not in the consensus and he adds
I firmly believe that the many worlds
interpretation should be in the
consensus and want to know why it is not
I agree
and I too don't know why
it may be that only future historians of
ideas will succeed in explaining it
after
the reality of multiple universes has
become as uncontroversial as that of
dinosaurs and of their evolution is
today
but perhaps I can say a few things that
might make this seem a little less
mysterious and less reprehensible
one thing that future historians might
notice is that today there are strong
divergences of opinion among proponents
of the theory
we all agree that it describes reality
not just predictions not just our
confidence in predictions
not just our states of knowledge
and so on
but we disagree about what reality it
does describe is the world that we
perceive as end particles in a
three-dimensional space actually a
complex function on a six n dimensional
one
does that function describe reality
or is it itself the reality is the
reality described by
Q number observables as I think and what
about time what about space-time and
Quantum fields and quantum gravity
and are the effects of one Quantum
object on another
purely local
or non-local what is the origin of
probability in this theory on all these
issues we disagree
indeed
Lev's question asks about
the many worlds interpretation I
disagree with that very term who would
call the theory of evolution the many
dinosaurs Theory
nor is Everett in quantum theory and
interpretation of quantum theory or
anything else it is quantum theory it
should just be quantum theory
or call it everettian if you want to
give Jude credit to the corrector of
earlier untenable misconceptions
in my view
splitting an explanatory Theory into its
formalism and its interpretation is
itself a reinterpretation which if
insisted upon is never more than
institutionalized casual history
it follows from the existence of these
disagreements
that most of today's most or all of
today's Advocates of everettian quantum
theory
must be mistaken about what the world
according to quantum theory is actually
like
hence those future historians might ask
what exactly were the unpersuaded
unpersuaded of
but this uh internal dissension Theory
won't do as an explanation of Lev's
mystery
in the early days of relativity
people disagreed about what the
so-called schwart-shield Singularity was
whether space was finite or infinite
static or expanding
Einstein even wrote to the times in 1919
categorically denying that his theory
supersedes Newtons
nevertheless
the vast majority of physicists were
soon incorporating einsteinian
relativity into their World Views
Lev's problem our problem
is that the same has not happened in
regard to quantum theory
we won't find the answer in Coon's
theory of scientists being stuck in
so-called paradigms
such theories would apply to all
fundamental progress including
relativity
the people most prominently stuck in
their Paradigm are actually the
Believers in paradigms
so what is special about quantum theory
that makes physicists reluctant to do
what physicists do namely apply the
theory test it
see what it says about the world and let
that inform your world view
why do they spin off into magic and
double talk or denial or wishful
thinking
many other insights about reality with
which science confronts us are much more
jarring for example
although no one is Jarred by the idea
that when we see the Andromeda galaxy in
the sky we are seeing it not as it is
now but as it was a long time ago
everyone is Jarred by the einsteinian
idea that there is no such thing as how
it is now
if you make an arbitrary choice of an
event in Andromeda to be now
all you have to do is walk up and down
the street on Earth
to change what is now at Andromeda
by weeks backwards or forwards
the relativity of simultaneity
surely that's harder to accept than
other universes
except for one thing
there aren't other instances of
ourselves at Andromeda no other me's
some identical some different and some
very different in which case who am I
nothing in relativity raises any such
issue of
personal identity in fact the only other
fundamental theory that does so is the
theory of computation
with its implication that artificial
minds are possible there too people are
won't to talk nonsense in order to avoid
plainly applying the theory in the way
they would apply any other
I don't claim that any of this could
fully answer Lev's question even if it
true even if it's true
still less would it provide a way to
restore reason to this issue
but
in regard to reason let me close with a
wild guess
in the 18th century
when they thought of themselves as
living in the Age of Reason
they were much more gullible about the
scope of science
than today
people were ready to accept that chess
playing automata already existed
that the horses had been trained to
count
and in the 19th century that Mary
Shelley's Frankenstein and julven's
submarines were just around the corner
but
in parallel with this
unreasonable gullibility or perhaps it
was reasonable
the 19th century also saw Rising
skepticism with Ada Lovelace of all
people denying that computers could
think
and later
the introduction of positivism and other
poison into the thinking of scientists
so here's my speculation
what else was growing
during the 19th century
Science teaching
science lessons and courses in
universities
in which
Generations learned that you don't have
to change your worldview you don't have
to understand
you only have to learn to say what one
is supposed to say
be able to calculate what one is
supposed to be able to calculate
sneer at what one is supposed to sneer
at
I don't mean just astrology in
creationism but eventually at reality
itself
that may be how we got into this mess
how to get out of it again
I must leave as an exercise for the
audience